## Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report

Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang,
 Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, Furu Wei
  
Microsoft Corporation
  
{wangliang,nanya,fuwei}@microsoft.com

##### Abstract

This technical report presents the training methodology and evaluation results of the open-source multilingual E5 text embedding models,
released in mid-2023.
Three embedding models of different sizes (small / base / large) are provided,
offering a balance between the inference efficiency and embedding quality.
The training procedure adheres to the English E5 model recipe,
involving contrastive pre-training on 1 billion multilingual text pairs,
followed by fine-tuning on a combination of labeled datasets.
Additionally,
we introduce a new instruction-tuned embedding model,
whose performance is on par with state-of-the-art, English-only models of similar sizes.
Information regarding the model release can be found at <https://github.com/microsoft/unilm/tree/master/e5>.

### 1 Introduction

Text embeddings serve as fundamental components in information retrieval systems
and retrieval-augmented language models.
Despite their significance,
most existing embedding models are trained exclusively on English text (Reimers and Gurevych, [2019](#bib.bib18); Ni et al., [2022b](#bib.bib15), [a](#bib.bib14)),
thereby limiting their applicability in multilingual contexts.

In this technical report,
we present the multilingual E5 text embedding models (*mE5-{small / base / large}*),
which extend the English E5 models (Wang et al., [2022](#bib.bib20)).
The training procedure adheres to the original two-stage methodology:
weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training on billions of text pairs,
followed by supervised fine-tuning on small quantity of high-quality labeled data.
We also release an instruction-tuned embedding model 111Here instructions refer to the natural language descriptions of the embedding tasks.
*mE5-large-instruct* by utilizing the synthetic data from  Wang et al. ([2023](#bib.bib21)).
Instructions can better inform embedding models about the task at hand,
thereby enhancing the quality of the embeddings.

For model evaluation,
we first demonstrate that our multilingual embeddings exhibit competitive performance
on the English portion of the MTEB benchmark (Muennighoff et al., [2023](#bib.bib12)),
and the instruction-tuned variant even surpasses strong English-only models of comparable sizes.
To showcase the multilingual capability of our models,
we also assess their performance on the MIRACL multilingual retrieval benchmark (Zhang et al., [2023](#bib.bib27))
across 161616 languages and on Bitext mining (Zweigenbaum et al., [2018](#bib.bib28); Artetxe and Schwenk, [2019](#bib.bib1))
in over 100100100 languages.

### 2 Training Methodology

|  | # Sampled |
| --- | --- |
| Wikipedia | 150M |
| mC4 | 160M |
| Multilingual CC News | 160M |
| NLLB | 160M |
| Reddit | 160M |
| S2ORC | 50M |
| Stackexchange | 50M |
| xP3 | 80M |
| Misc. SBERT Data | 10M |
| Total | ∼similar-to\sim1B |

Table 1: Data mixture for contrastive pre-training.

Weakly-supervised Contrastive Pre-training 
In the first stage,
we continually pre-train our model on a diverse mixture of multilingual text pairs
obtained from various sources as listed in Table [1](#S2.T1 "Table 1 ‣ 2 Training Methodology ‣ Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report").
The models are trained with a large batch size 32​k32𝑘32k for a total of 30​k30𝑘30k steps,
which approximately goes over ∼1similar-toabsent1\sim 1 billion text pairs.
We employ the standard InfoNCE contrastive loss with only in-batch negatives,
while other hyperparameters remain consistent with the English E5 models (Wang et al., [2022](#bib.bib20)).

|  | # Sampled |
| --- | --- |
| MS-MARCO Passage | 500k |
| MS-MARCO Document | 70k |
| NQ, TriviaQA, SQuAD | 220k |
| NLI | 275k |
| ELI5 | 100k |
| NLLB | 100k |
| DuReader Retrieval | 86k |
| Fever | 70k |
| HotpotQA | 70k |
| Quora Duplicate Questions | 15k |
| Mr. TyDi | 50k |
| MIRACL | 40k |
| Total | ∼similar-to\sim1.6M |

Table 2: Data mixture for supervised fine-tuning.

Supervised Fine-tuning 
In the second stage,
we fine-tune the models from the previous stage on a combination of high-quality labeled datasets.
In addition to in-batch negatives,
we also incorporate mined hard negatives and knowledge distillation from a cross-encoder model
to further enhance the embedding quality.
For the *mE5-{small / base / large}* models released in mid-2023,
we employ the data mixture shown in Table [2](#S2.T2 "Table 2 ‣ 2 Training Methodology ‣ Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report").

For the *mE5-large-instruct* model,
we adopt the data mixture from  Wang et al. ([2023](#bib.bib21)),
which includes additional 500​k500𝑘500k synthetic data generated by GPT-3.5/4 (OpenAI, [2023](#bib.bib16)).
This new mixture encompasses 150​k150𝑘150k unique instructions and covers 939393 languages.
We re-use the instruction templates from  Wang et al. ([2023](#bib.bib21))
for both the training and evaluation of this instruction-tuned model.

### 3 Experimental Results

|  | MTEB (56 datasets) |
| --- | --- |
| LaBSE | 45.2 |
| Coheremultilingual-v3multilingual-v3{}\_{\text{multilingual-v3}} | 64.0 |
| BGElarge-en-v1.5large-en-v1.5{}\_{\text{large-en-v1.5}} | 64.2 |
| mE5smallsmall{}\_{\text{small}} | 57.9 |
| mE5basebase{}\_{\text{base}} | 59.5 |
| mE5largelarge{}\_{\text{large}} | 61.5 |
| mE5large-instructlarge-instruct{}\_{\text{large-instruct}} | 64.4 |

Table 3: Results on the English portion of the MTEB benchmark.
LaBSE (Feng et al., [2022](#bib.bib7)) is exclusively trained on translation pairs.
Limited information is available regarding the training data and model size are available for Coheremultilingual-v3multilingual-v3{}\_{\text{multilingual-v3}}(<https://txt.cohere.com/introducing-embed-v3/>).
BGElarge-en-v1.5large-en-v1.5{}\_{\text{large-en-v1.5}} (Xiao et al., [2023](#bib.bib23)) is an English-only model.
Full results are in Appendix Table  [7](#A1.T7 "Table 7 ‣ Appendix A Implementation Details ‣ Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report").

English Text Embedding Benchmark 
Multilingual embedding models should be able to perform well on English tasks as well.
In Table [3](#S3.T3 "Table 3 ‣ 3 Experimental Results ‣ Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report"),
we compare our models with other multilingual and English-only models on the MTEB benchmark (Muennighoff et al., [2023](#bib.bib12)).
Our best mE5 model surpasses the previous state-of-the-art multilingual model Coheremultilingual-v3multilingual-v3{}\_{\text{multilingual-v3}},
by 0.40.40.4 points and outperforms a strong English-only model,
BGElarge-en-v1.5large-en-v1.5{}\_{\text{large-en-v1.5}}, by 0.20.20.2 points.
While smaller models demonstrate inferior performance,
their faster inference and reduced storage costs render them advantageous for numerous applications.

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | nDCG@10 | R@100 |
| BM25 | 39.3 | 78.7 |
| mDPR | 41.5 | 78.8 |
| mE5smallsmall{}\_{\text{small}} | 60.8 | 92.4 |
| mE5basebase{}\_{\text{base}} | 62.3 | 93.1 |
| mE5largelarge{}\_{\text{large}} | 66.5 | 94.3 |
| mE5large-instructlarge-instruct{}\_{\text{large-instruct}} | 65.7 | 94.6 |

Table 4: Multilingual retrieval on the development set of the MIRACL benchmark.
Numbers are averaged over 161616 languages.

Multilingual Retrieval 
We evaluate the multilingual retrieval capability of our models using the MIRACL benchmark (Zhang et al., [2023](#bib.bib27)).
As shown in Table [4](#S3.T4 "Table 4 ‣ 3 Experimental Results ‣ Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report"),
mE5 models significantly outperform mDPR,
which has been fine-tuned on the MIRACL training set,
in both nDCG@10 and recall metrics.
Detailed results on individual languages are provided in Appendix Table [6](#A0.T6 "Table 6 ‣ Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report").

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | |  | | --- | | BUCC 2018 | | 4 langs | | |  | | --- | | Tatoeba | | 112 langs | |
| mContrievermsmarcomsmarco{}\_{\text{msmarco}} | 93.7 | 37.7 |
| LaBSE | 98.8 | 81.1 |
| mE5smallsmall{}\_{\text{small}} | 93.2 | 64.2 |
| mE5basebase{}\_{\text{base}} | 98.1 | 68.1 |
| mE5largelarge{}\_{\text{large}} | 98.6 | 75.7 |
| mE5large-instructlarge-instruct{}\_{\text{large-instruct}} | 99.0 | 83.8 |

Table 5: Bitext mining results.
mContriever (Izacard et al., [2021](#bib.bib9)) numbers are run by ourselves based on the released checkpoint.

Bitext Mining 
is a cross-lingual similarity search task that requires the matching of two sentences with little lexical overlap.
As demonstrated in Table  [5](#S3.T5 "Table 5 ‣ 3 Experimental Results ‣ Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report"),
mE5 models exhibit competitive performance across a broad range of languages,
both high-resource and low-resource.
Notably,
the mE5large-instructlarge-instruct{}\_{\text{large-instruct}} model surpasses the performance of LaBSE,
a model specifically designed for bitext mining,
due to the expanded language coverage afforded by the synthetic data (Wang et al., [2023](#bib.bib21)).

### 4 Conclusion

In this brief technical report,
we introduce multilingual E5 text embedding models that are trained with a multi-stage pipeline.
By making the model weights publicly available,
practitioners can leverage these models for information retrieval, semantic similarity, and clustering tasks
across a diverse range of languages.

### References

* Artetxe and Schwenk (2019)

  Mikel Artetxe and Holger Schwenk. 2019.
  Massively multilingual sentence embeddings for zero-shot cross-lingual transfer and beyond.
  *Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics*, 7:597–610.
* Campos et al. (2016)

  Daniel Fernando Campos, Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao, Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, Li Deng, and Bhaskar Mitra. 2016.
  [Ms marco: A human generated machine reading comprehension dataset](https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.09268).
  *ArXiv preprint*, abs/1611.09268.
* Conneau et al. (2020)

  Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020.
  [Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.747).
  In *Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics*, pages 8440–8451, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Costa-jussà et al. (2022)

  Marta R Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Heffernan, Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, et al. 2022.
  No language left behind: Scaling human-centered machine translation.
  *arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04672*.
* DataCanary et al. (2017)

  DataCanary, hilfialkaff, Lili Jiang, Meg Risdal, Nikhil Dandekar, and tomtung. 2017.
  [Quora question pairs](https://kaggle.com/competitions/quora-question-pairs).
* Fan et al. (2019)

  Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. 2019.
  [ELI5: Long form question answering](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1346).
  In *Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics*, pages 3558–3567, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Feng et al. (2022)

  Fangxiaoyu Feng, Yinfei Yang, Daniel Cer, Naveen Arivazhagan, and Wei Wang. 2022.
  Language-agnostic bert sentence embedding.
  In *Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)*, pages 878–891.
* Gao et al. (2021)

  Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. 2021.
  [SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of sentence embeddings](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.552).
  In *Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing*, pages 6894–6910, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Izacard et al. (2021)

  Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2021.
  [Towards unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.09118).
  *ArXiv preprint*, abs/2112.09118.
* Karpukhin et al. (2020)

  Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020.
  [Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.550).
  In *Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)*, pages 6769–6781, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Lo et al. (2020)

  Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Mark Neumann, Rodney Kinney, and Daniel S Weld. 2020.
  S2orc: The semantic scholar open research corpus.
  In *Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics*, pages 4969–4983.
* Muennighoff et al. (2023)

  Niklas Muennighoff, Nouamane Tazi, Loic Magne, and Nils Reimers. 2023.
  [MTEB: Massive text embedding benchmark](https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.148).
  In *Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics*, pages 2014–2037, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Muennighoff et al. (2022)

  Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, et al. 2022.
  Crosslingual generalization through multitask finetuning.
  *arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01786*.
* Ni et al. (2022a)

  Jianmo Ni, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Noah Constant, Ji Ma, Keith Hall, Daniel Cer, and Yinfei Yang. 2022a.
  [Sentence-t5: Scalable sentence encoders from pre-trained text-to-text models](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.146).
  In *Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022*, pages 1864–1874, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Ni et al. (2022b)

  Jianmo Ni, Chen Qu, Jing Lu, Zhuyun Dai, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Ji Ma, Vincent Zhao, Yi Luan, Keith Hall, Ming-Wei Chang, and Yinfei Yang. 2022b.
  [Large dual encoders are generalizable retrievers](https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.669).
  In *Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing*, pages 9844–9855, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* OpenAI (2023)

  OpenAI. 2023.
  [Gpt-4 technical report](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774).
  *ArXiv preprint*, abs/2303.08774.
* Qiu et al. (2022)

  Yifu Qiu, Hongyu Li, Yingqi Qu, Ying Chen, QiaoQiao She, Jing Liu, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang. 2022.
  [DuReader-retrieval: A large-scale Chinese benchmark for passage retrieval from web search engine](https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.357).
  In *Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing*, pages 5326–5338, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Reimers and Gurevych (2019)

  Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019.
  [Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1410).
  In *Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP)*, pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Thorne et al. (2018)

  James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018.
  [FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction and VERification](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-1074).
  In *Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers)*, pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Wang et al. (2022)

  Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. 2022.
  [Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.03533).
  *ArXiv preprint*, abs/2212.03533.
* Wang et al. (2023)

  Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. 2023.
  Improving text embeddings with large language models.
  *arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00368*.
* Wang et al. (2021)

  Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. 2021.
  Minilmv2: Multi-head self-attention relation distillation for compressing pretrained transformers.
  In *Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021*, pages 2140–2151.
* Xiao et al. (2023)

  Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, and Niklas Muennighof. 2023.
  [C-pack: Packaged resources to advance general chinese embedding](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07597).
  *ArXiv preprint*, abs/2309.07597.
* Xue et al. (2021)

  Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya Siddhant, Aditya Barua, and Colin Raffel. 2021.
  mt5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer.
  In *Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies*, pages 483–498.
* Yang et al. (2018)

  Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D. Manning. 2018.
  [HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D18-1259).
  In *Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing*, pages 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Zhang et al. (2021)

  Xinyu Zhang, Xueguang Ma, Peng Shi, and Jimmy Lin. 2021.
  [Mr. TyDi: A multi-lingual benchmark for dense retrieval](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.mrl-1.12).
  In *Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Multilingual Representation Learning*, pages 127–137, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
* Zhang et al. (2023)

  Xinyu Crystina Zhang, Nandan Thakur, Odunayo Ogundepo, Ehsan Kamalloo, David Alfonso-Hermelo, Xiaoguang Li, Qun Liu, Mehdi Rezagholizadeh, and Jimmy Lin. 2023.
  Miracl: A multilingual retrieval dataset covering 18 diverse languages.
  *Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics*, 11:1114–1131.
* Zweigenbaum et al. (2018)

  Pierre Zweigenbaum, Serge Sharoff, and Reinhard Rapp. 2018.
  Overview of the third bucc shared task: Spotting parallel sentences in comparable corpora.
  In *Proceedings of 11th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora*, pages 39–42.

|  | nDCG@10 | | | | R@100 | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | mE5smallsmall{}\_{\text{small}} | mE5basebase{}\_{\text{base}} | mE5largelarge{}\_{\text{large}} | E5large-instructlarge-instruct{}\_{\text{large-instruct}} | mE5smallsmall{}\_{\text{small}} | mE5basebase{}\_{\text{base}} | mE5largelarge{}\_{\text{large}} | E5large-instructlarge-instruct{}\_{\text{large-instruct}} |
| ar | 71.4 | 71.6 | 76.0 | 76.8 | 96.2 | 95.9 | 97.3 | 97.5 |
| bn | 68.2 | 70.2 | 75.9 | 73.9 | 97.4 | 96.6 | 98.2 | 98.2 |
| en | 48.0 | 51.2 | 52.9 | 51.5 | 85.3 | 86.4 | 87.6 | 88.2 |
| es | 51.2 | 51.5 | 52.9 | 53.7 | 87.6 | 88.6 | 89.1 | 89.3 |
| fa | 53.3 | 57.4 | 59.0 | 59.4 | 90.4 | 91.2 | 92.9 | 92.9 |
| fi | 73.3 | 74.4 | 77.8 | 77.3 | 96.3 | 96.9 | 98.1 | 97.9 |
| fr | 47.6 | 49.7 | 54.5 | 53.7 | 89.5 | 90.0 | 90.6 | 91.7 |
| hi | 55.2 | 58.4 | 62.0 | 60.3 | 91.0 | 92.6 | 93.9 | 94.1 |
| id | 50.7 | 51.1 | 52.9 | 52.1 | 86.2 | 87.4 | 87.9 | 88.4 |
| ja | 63.6 | 64.7 | 70.6 | 69.0 | 95.2 | 96.0 | 97.1 | 96.9 |
| ko | 61.2 | 62.2 | 66.5 | 65.3 | 92.0 | 91.6 | 93.4 | 93.0 |
| ru | 59.1 | 61.5 | 67.4 | 67.9 | 92.2 | 92.7 | 95.5 | 95.4 |
| sw | 68.4 | 71.1 | 74.9 | 72.5 | 94.7 | 95.6 | 96.7 | 97.2 |
| te | 81.3 | 75.2 | 84.6 | 83.4 | 97.6 | 98.0 | 99.2 | 99.0 |
| th | 75.0 | 75.2 | 80.2 | 78.6 | 98.2 | 98.0 | 98.9 | 98.7 |
| zh | 45.9 | 51.5 | 56.0 | 56.2 | 87.9 | 92.1 | 93.3 | 94.9 |
| Avg | 60.8 | 62.3 | 66.5 | 65.7 | 92.4 | 93.1 | 94.3 | 94.6 |

Table 6: nDCG@10 and R@100 on the development set of the MIRACL dataset.

### Appendix A Implementation Details

Contrastive Pre-training Text Pairs 
In Table  [1](#S2.T1 "Table 1 ‣ 2 Training Methodology ‣ Multilingual E5 Text Embeddings: A Technical Report"),
to construct text pairs,
we utilize (section title, section passage) for Wikipedia,
(title, page content) for mC4 (Xue et al., [2021](#bib.bib24)),
(title, news content) for multilingual CCNews 222<https://commoncrawl.org/blog/news-dataset-available>,
translation pairs for NLLB (Costa-jussà et al., [2022](#bib.bib4)),
(comment, response) for Reddit 333<https://www.reddit.com/>,
(title, abstract) and citation pairs for S2ORC (Lo et al., [2020](#bib.bib11)),
(question, answer) for Stackexchange 444<https://stackexchange.com/>,
(input prompt, response) for xP3 (Muennighoff et al., [2022](#bib.bib13)).
For the miscellaneous SBERT data 555<https://huggingface.co/datasets/sentence-transformers/embedding-training-data>,
we include the following datasets:
SimpleWiki, WikiAnswers, AGNews, AltLex, AmazonQA, AmazonReview,
CNN/DailyMail, CodeSearchNet, Flickr30k, GooAQ, NPR, SearchQA,
SentenceCompression, Specter, WikiHow, XSum, and YahooAnswers.

Data Mixture for Supervised Fine-tuning 
It includes ELI5 (Fan et al., [2019](#bib.bib6))(sample at 20%percent2020\%), HotpotQA (Yang et al., [2018](#bib.bib25)),
FEVER (Thorne et al., [2018](#bib.bib19)), MIRACL (Zhang et al., [2023](#bib.bib27)),
MSMARCO passage ranking and document ranking (sample at 20%percent2020\%) (Campos et al., [2016](#bib.bib2)),
NQ (Karpukhin et al., [2020](#bib.bib10)), NLLB (sample at 100​k100𝑘100k) (Costa-jussà et al., [2022](#bib.bib4)),
NLI (Gao et al., [2021](#bib.bib8)), SQuAD (Karpukhin et al., [2020](#bib.bib10)), TriviaQA (Karpukhin et al., [2020](#bib.bib10)),
Quora Duplicate Questions (DataCanary et al., [2017](#bib.bib5))(sample at 10%percent1010\%), MrTyDi (Zhang et al., [2021](#bib.bib26)),
and DuReader (Qiu et al., [2022](#bib.bib17)) datasets.

For the *mE5-large-instruct* model,
we employ the new data mixture from  Wang et al. ([2023](#bib.bib21)).
The main difference is the inclusion of synthetic data from GPT-4.

Training Hyperparameters 
The mE5smallsmall{}\_{\text{small}}, mE5basebase{}\_{\text{base}} and mE5largelarge{}\_{\text{large}}
are initialized from the multilingual MiniLM  (Wang et al., [2021](#bib.bib22)),
*xlm-roberta-base* (Conneau et al., [2020](#bib.bib3)),
and *xlm-roberta-large* respectively.
For contrastive pre-training,
the learning rate is set to {3,2,1

3213,2,1}×10−4absentsuperscript104\times 10^{-4} for the {small, base, large} models.
For fine-tuning,
we use batch size 512512512 and
learning rate {3,2,1

3213,2,1}×10−5absentsuperscript105\times 10^{-5} for the {small, base, large} models.
All models are fine-tuned for 222 epochs.
The *mE5-large-instruct* model adopts the same hyperparameters as the mE5largelarge{}\_{\text{large}} large,
but is fine-tuned on the new data mixture by  Wang et al. ([2023](#bib.bib21)).

| Dataset | mE5smallsmall{}\_{\text{small}} | mE5basebase{}\_{\text{base}} | mE5largelarge{}\_{\text{large}} | mE5large-instructlarge-instruct{}\_{\text{large-instruct}} |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| BIOSSES | 82.3 | 85.1 | 82.5 | 87.0 |
| SICK-R | 77.5 | 78.5 | 80.2 | 81.7 |
| STS12 | 76.6 | 76.7 | 80.0 | 82.6 |
| STS13 | 77.0 | 78.0 | 81.5 | 87.2 |
| STS14 | 75.5 | 76.6 | 77.7 | 85.0 |
| STS15 | 87.1 | 88.2 | 89.3 | 91.0 |
| STS16 | 83.6 | 84.3 | 85.8 | 87.3 |
| STS17 | 86.4 | 87.8 | 88.1 | 90.0 |
| STS22 | 60.9 | 61.8 | 63.1 | 67.6 |
| STSBenchmark | 84.0 | 85.6 | 87.3 | 88.4 |
| SummEval | 30.0 | 30.1 | 29.7 | 30.4 |
| SprintDuplicateQuestions | 92.2 | 93.0 | 93.1 | 91.2 |
| TwitterSemEval2015 | 70.8 | 72.2 | 75.3 | 80.3 |
| TwitterURLCorpus | 84.8 | 85.5 | 85.8 | 87.1 |
| AmazonCounterfactualClassification | 73.8 | 79.0 | 79.1 | 76.2 |
| AmazonPolarityClassification | 88.7 | 90.6 | 93.5 | 96.3 |
| AmazonReviewsClassification | 44.7 | 44.5 | 47.6 | 56.7 |
| Banking77Classification | 79.4 | 82.7 | 84.7 | 85.7 |
| EmotionClassification | 42.5 | 45.2 | 46.5 | 51.5 |
| ImdbClassification | 80.8 | 85.5 | 90.2 | 94.6 |
| MassiveIntentClassification | 70.3 | 72.1 | 73.8 | 77.1 |
| MassiveScenarioClassification | 74.5 | 77.1 | 77.5 | 80.5 |
| MTOPDomainClassification | 91.1 | 93.1 | 93.7 | 93.9 |
| MTOPIntentClassification | 71.1 | 75.3 | 77.9 | 82.5 |
| ToxicConversationsClassification | 69.4 | 69.8 | 71.3 | 71.1 |
| TweetSentimentExtractionClassification | 62.6 | 61.3 | 62.0 | 64.6 |
| AskUbuntuDupQuestions | 57.9 | 58.2 | 60.3 | 63.9 |
| MindSmallReranking | 30.3 | 31.0 | 31.4 | 33.1 |
| SciDocsRR | 78.1 | 80.7 | 82.0 | 85.9 |
| StackOverflowDupQuestions | 49.2 | 49.4 | 49.7 | 51.5 |
| ArxivClusteringP2P | 39.2 | 40.3 | 44.3 | 46.4 |
| ArxivClusteringS2S | 30.8 | 35.4 | 38.4 | 40.5 |
| BiorxivClusteringP2P | 35.8 | 35.0 | 35.3 | 40.9 |
| BiorxivClusteringS2S | 27.1 | 29.5 | 33.5 | 36.3 |
| MedrxivClusteringP2P | 30.9 | 28.9 | 31.5 | 36.9 |
| MedrxivClusteringS2S | 27.3 | 28.4 | 29.7 | 35.5 |
| RedditClustering | 39.1 | 42.4 | 46.5 | 56.6 |
| RedditClusteringP2P | 59.0 | 55.2 | 63.2 | 64.3 |
| StackExchangeClustering | 53.5 | 55.3 | 57.5 | 66.8 |
| StackExchangeClusteringP2P | 32.1 | 30.5 | 32.7 | 42.5 |
| TwentyNewsgroupsClustering | 33.2 | 36.0 | 38.9 | 51.3 |
| ArguAna | 39.1 | 44.2 | 54.4 | 58.4 |
| ClimateFEVER | 22.6 | 23.9 | 25.7 | 29.9 |
| CQADupstackAndroidRetrieval | 36.1 | 38.5 | 39.7 | 42.7 |
| DBPedia | 37.8 | 40.4 | 41.3 | 38.4 |
| FEVER | 75.3 | 79.4 | 82.8 | 78.0 |
| FiQA2018 | 33.3 | 38.2 | 43.8 | 47.7 |
| HotpotQA | 65.1 | 68.6 | 71.2 | 69.3 |
| MSMARCO | 41.0 | 42.3 | 43.7 | 40.4 |
| NFCorpus | 31.0 | 32.5 | 34.0 | 35.5 |
| NQ | 56.3 | 60.0 | 64.1 | 57.8 |
| QuoraRetrieval | 86.9 | 87.7 | 88.2 | 89.2 |
| SCIDOCS | 13.9 | 17.2 | 17.5 | 18.7 |
| SciFact | 67.7 | 69.3 | 70.4 | 71.8 |
| Touche2020 | 21.2 | 21.4 | 23.4 | 27.2 |
| TRECCOVID | 72.6 | 69.8 | 71.3 | 82.0 |
| Average | 57.9 | 59.4 | 61.5 | 64.4 |

Table 7: Results for each dataset in the MTEB benchmark.
The evaluation metrics are available in the original paper (Muennighoff et al., [2023](#bib.bib12)).